# Demo Script

(This was recorded for the HexBoard discord channel just after getting HexBoard support working but prior to any public release.)

This is a preliminary demo video to show the HexBoard being used a keyboard for my microtonal music software, Syntoniq. At the time of this recording in December 2025, Syntoniq has not yet been released, but I intend to release it as free and open source software as soon as it is stable and documented. Right now, the latest HexBoard firmware is version 1.2. Using the HexBoard with Syntoniq requires a custom firmware, but hopefully my modifications will be folded into the official firmware in a future version. I'll do a quick fly-over.

Start with a split video showing the keyboard and the web UI.)

On the left, you see a video of the actual keyboard. On the right, you see the read-only web UI. The web UI gives you status about what the keyboard is doing and labels the buttons. The key colors on the actual keyboard are reflected in the web UI. Note that the keyboard also writes output to the terminal. That output includes information about the notes you are playing. Right now, you see an approximation of the Syntoniq Logo drawn with the button LEDs.

The labels are the note names and pitches in syntoniq notation. The trailing `'` or `,` characters, optionally followed by a number, are the number of octaves above or below the base pitch. The bottom half shows the interval over the base pitch in Syntoniq pitch notation. The `^` indicates an exponent. The base is not specified here, so it's 2, meaning on octave. For example, `^5|12`, on `f`, indicates that `f` is 5 12ths of an octave above the base pitch, which is C.

Let's start by loading a layout of 12-EDO, the regular 12-tone scale. On a hexagonal keyboard such as the HexBoard, we define "vertical" as the "up and left" direction. In this layout, the pitch increases two steps, or a whole tone, as we move to the right and five steps, or a fourth, when we move up and to the left. That means the pitch goes up a fifth when we move up and to the right.

I'll just play a few notes and chords. Notice the colors:
* Fourths and fifths are blue when off and green when on.
* Major thirds and minor sixths are purple when off and pink when on.
* Minor thirds and major sixths are red when off and orange when on.
* A special color is assigned to the note one half step above the tonic pitch.
I am still tweaking colors and color schemes.

The first feature I'm going to demonstrate is "shift". Here I can hit the shift button, which turns it green. Then I can touch two keys. The first key is "moved" to the position of the second key. For some tunings, this makes it possible to reach additional notes. After I press the first key, the shift button turns purple. Then I can touch the second key to move the first key there. As an alternative, you can hold the shift key while touching the two keys. You can hear that the notes have moved, and you can see it reflected on the web UI.

The second feature is transpose. Transpose is similar, but it changes the pitch without changing the note names or moving the notes. The effect is nearly the same for equal division scales, but it can be useful for transposed instruments, and it really shines when chaining tuning systems, which I will demonstrate next. To transpose, use the transpose key. Then touch two notes. The pitch of the first note is assigned to the second note.

Now when I press the note, you hear the pitch of the old note, though the note name has stayed the same. I'll overlay the output of the keyboard here so you can see that, when I press a key, it tells me information about the transposition.

Before I move onto microtonal features, I want to point out that layout 2 is also 12-EDO with 2 steps horizontal and 5 steps vertical, but the keyboard here is called "hexboard-60." That's an alternative layout where a "row" is 60 degrees from horizontal. This gives you a lot more notes going across in the middle of the keyboard and may be a better fit for some tuning systems. Let's take a look. To switch, I'll hit the layout button and then the second button, corresponding to layout 2. You can see th esame general pattern, but everything is rotated 60 degrees. I didn't make a hexboard-120, since it's not meaningfully different from hexboard-60, but it would be possible to add that.

Let's talk about microtonal features. I'm showing the contents of the `demo.stq` file. I'm not going to talk much about the file in this video -- that will come later. Without much explanation, you can see where the layouts are defined for the two layouts we've seen. Don't worry about the parameters or the row and column numbering. That's a detail for later. Take a quick glance at this `define_scale` call. This is creating a scale with 17 equal divisions of the octave and giving names to the notes. We use `#` for sharp and `%` for flat since `%` looks a little like the flat symbol. I've created a mapping for hexboard-60. I'm going to hit the reset key to clear the transposition I applied earlier, and then I'll select the 17-EDO layout.

The first thing you might notice is that there are no red or purple lights. This is because 17-EDO doesn't have a good third or sixth. It does have good fourth and fifths. This layout uses the same intervals. Now I'm going to show you the power of transposition. Suppose you were playing something in 12-EDO, and you want to switch to 17-EDO but in the key of 12-tone "D". This is something that most existing systems can't do very easily at all, but with Syntoniq keyboard, we can do it trivially. Notice that this button is C, the base pitch for the scale. Let's say I want that to sound like D. I can first hit transpose, then switch to my 12-EDO layout, then touch the note for D. Then I can go back and now touch the C key. I may want to do some additional work on the feedback for this because it's easy to lose your place. If you make a mistake, you can always just touch the transpose key, and it will cancel the in-progress transposition.

The next feature I'll demonstrate is manual layout. Back in the file, I have scale called JI-11. This is toy Just Intonation scale I made that has some good ratios for regular diatonic scale pitches in the keys of C, F, and G, and it also has a 7th harmonic and 11th harmonic relative to C. Right below the scale definition, there is manual mapping that lays out the notes on a portion of a grid. Below that, the mapping is placed on the keyboard indicating the location of the anchor pitch. The anchor note for manual mapping is marked with the @ sign. You can see from the web UI that this is layout 7. Understanding the rows and columns is a bit complex, so I'm going to gloss over it. It's not what you'd first guess, but it's there for a solid reason. For now, we can locate the "c" notes along a certain column, and by pressing the keys, you can see which one is the main note. There's no indication on the UI for octave markings of the way we tile manual mappings -- that's out of scope for this video. For now, you can know that every vertical repetition of this mapping goes up or down an octave, but that can be configured.

In this scale, we have a good C Major chord here: ... I can also find good F and G chords. But the D major is out of tune. Maybe you want that for effect, but what if you want an in-tune D major? In most systems, you'd have to add those notes to your scale or create multiple scales, but here, we can just transpose. I'm just going to give the pitch of D to the C note, like this: ... Now, while this still shows C, E, G, it plays an in-tune D major chord, and you can see in the terminal output that we are transposed by 9/8. We can reverse this by just giving the current C pitch back to D, like this: ... Now we are no longer transposed. The Syntoniq notation language allows you to create tunings in this way, and this way, you can use the keyboard to create the same pitches that you can express using the notation language. I'm not talking more about the notation language in this video, since this is HexBoard-focused.

The final layout thing I'm going to show is combining multiple layouts. My last layout, number 8, contains both my JI-11 scale and 19-EDO. Here, we drop the JI-11 mapping onto the layout but limit its cope with `rows_above`, `rows_below`, `cols_left`, and `cols_right`. Then below, we add the 19-EDO layout. Syntoniq goes through the mappings in order for each keys and assigns a key to the first matching mapping. Let's take a look. What we've got here is most of the bottom four rows dedicated to the JI scale. Then the rest is 19-EDO. When you do this, you can shift and transpose independently. Let's shift the 19-EDO part of the layout. When I do that, it shifts, but the JI part stays the same I can also transpose. Let's say I want a JI-11 major chord played with the base pitch as the first scale degree in 19-EDO. All I have to do is transpose and copy the pitch of the note from one scale to another. You can find the single step above the tonic here: ... To move that pitch to the base of the JI tuning, I just use transpose, like this. Now we have a perfect Just Intonation major scale starting from one step up in 19-EDO. Notice that the keyboard tracks which buttons have the same pitch even if they are in different scales, so when I touch the note called "C" in JI-11, the corresponding pitch lights up in the 19-EDO part. What if I want to go down an octave just for JI? I can use shift, confined to the layout. Let's shift up two rows. Now you can see the JI scale down an octave. I should also show the octave transposition keys. They effect the entire layout. You can even press them while holding notes.

Let's look at one more feature: sustain. If you're playing around with harmonies and want to construct a complex chord, you can use the sustain feature. You can even do this with notes that aren't all simultaneously available. When you transpose, already sounding notes stay where they are. I'm going to turn on sustain. Now, when I press a note, it stays on. You can toggle notes on and off by pressing and releasing. Let's play a chord here. Now I'll transpose and add two more notes. Let's reset and try this with a 31-EDO chord. I'll switch to layout 5. 31-EDO has a neutral third, right between major and minor. It's degree 9. You can find it here... Let's do a neutral triad. Now let's construct a scale with stacked fifths and then the same ones offset by a neutral third. We can do this with sustain, and then we can see all the notes. If we make a mistake, we can turn notes on and off. We can go up and down octaves, shift, or transpose while we work if we want. Let's try it.

That's a quick overview of the Syntoniq keyboard program using the HexBoard as a controller. To the HexBoard team, thanks for making this possible.
